MAZAMAS BYLAWS

ARTICLE I – NAME

The name of the corporation shall be “Mazamas,” with its principal office in Portland,
Oregon.
ARTICLE II – PURPOSE

The Mazamas is organized and shall be operated exclusively for charitable, educational, and
scientific purposes as defined in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. In
furtherance thereof, the object, business and pursuit of the Mazamas shall be to promote
climbing, outdoor activities, responsible recreation, and conservation values through outdoor education, advocacy, and outreach.  

ARTICLE III – MEMBERS

Section 1. There shall be three classes of members:

a. Annual member – Application for membership shall be open to any person who supports the purpose statement in Article II and whose values are congruent with those of the Mazamas. Continuing membership is contingent upon being up-to-date on membership dues.

b. Life member - Any annual member, whose dues have been paid for the current year,
    may become a life member by paying an amount equal to twenty five times the current annual dues, and life members are not required to pay annual dues. 

c. Honorary member - Persons who have rendered distinguished service to the Mazamas or who are eminent for achievement over a period of not less than ten years in climbing, conservation, exploration, scientific research or outdoor activities, shall be eligible for honorary recognition by the Mazamas. Honorary members shall not be required to pay dues, but shall have all other rights and privileges of membership. Executive Council has authority to grant Annual or Life member status to an Honorary member.

Section 2. Applications for annual or life membership shall be accompanied by the required dues and initiation fee as set out in the Mazamas Policies and Procedures. All annual dues following the original application for membership shall be payable in advance and due at the beginning of the fiscal year.

Section 3 Members shall be entitled to vote for the annual election of the three members of the Board of Directors (Board) and three members of the Nominating Committee and on such other matters as may be required by law.

Section 4 . The Board shall have power, by unanimous vote of all its members, to expel any member of Mazamas for such cause as shall in its opinion justify its action. Such action shall not be taken until the process steps are taken as outlined in the Mazamas Policies and Procedures.  

Section 5. Consistent with its purposes, Mazamas shall not discriminate in the terms and
conditions of membership, or in its activities, on the basis of race, religion, sex, national
origin, sexual orientation, age, or disability, provided that an individual meets the requirements for membership in these bylaws.


ARTICLE IV – MEETINGS OF MEMBERS 

Section 1.  Annual Meeting. The date of the regular annual meeting shall be held during the first month of the fiscal year with the date set by the Board of Directors who shall also set the time and place. Notification of the annual meeting shall be on the website and in the Mazamas publication not less than three weeks previous to the meeting date.

Section 2. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Mazamas may be convened by the President or a simple majority of the Board of Directors. Special meetings shall be convened by the President at any time upon written request of seventy-five voting members. Notice of each special meeting shall be given to each voting member, by email or by mail, not less than five days before the meeting.

Section 3. Quorum. Five percent of the voting members shall constitute a quorum at the annual meeting and at special meetings of the Mazamas. 


ARTICLE V – BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Section 1. Board Role, Size, Composition.  The Mazamas Board of Directors (Board) is responsible for business affairs and overall policy and direction of the Mazamas and delegates responsibility for day-to-day operations to the Mazamas Executive Director and committees. The Board shall be subject to the Bylaws of the Mazamas and its actions shall comply with motions approved by the voting members. The Board shall be made up of twelve directors. Nine directors must be Mazamas members voted in by membership. The other three directors do not have to be Mazamas members but have a special skill or experience that is viewed as beneficial to the Mazamas.

Section 2. Board of Director Elections and Terms.  Three of the nine Directors shall be elected each year at the annual election for a term of three years. No Director shall be eligible for another election to the Board of Directors until one year has elapsed after completion of one full term. Vacancies for an unexpired term on the Board shall be filled by a majority vote of all the remaining Directors. The Board of Directors receive no compensation other than reimbursement of reasonable expenses.

Section 3. Meetings and Quorum.  The Board of Directors shall meet at least quarterly, at an agreed upon time and place.  A majority of the Directors shall constitutes a quorum. Directors are deemed present in person and count for quorum and voting purposes if they participate by any telephonic or electronic method by which all board members can simultaneously communicate with each other.

Section 4. Board Action Using Email. The Board may make decisions by email if a motion is approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors in office. Certain procedures must be followed for email voting.

(a) 	All directors must provide an email address.
(b) 	Email notice to directors must describe proposed action and when it will be effective. 
(c) 	Must give directors at least 48 hours to vote. (d) Directors can change their vote anytime up to deadline.
(e)	 An affirmative vote of majority of directors in office is needed to pass the proposed action. 
(f) 	Record of notice and email vote must be kept in minutes. 

Section 5. Notice. Notice of an official Board meeting shall be posted on the website or published in the Mazamas publication.

Section 6. – Officers The Officers of the Mazamas shall be a President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer who shall be chosen by the incoming Board from their own number each year at a meeting to be called and held within fifteen days following the annual election. Officers may serve successive terms. Any Officer who fails to attend Board meetings or perform the duties of his or her office for three consecutive months may be removed from office by an affirmative vote of six Directors. The Board has authority to fill such Officer positions by a majority vote of all the remaining Directors.

President shall preside at all meetings of the Mazamas and of the Executive Council, except for the procedure for the election of Officers.The President and the Secretary shall execute specific deeds and other instruments on behalf of the Mazamas when
authorized to do so by the Executive Council.

Vice-President: assumes the duties of the President in the President’s absence or inability to act. 

Secretary shall oversee performance of the following duties: record the proceedings of all Board meetings, maintain an up-to-date copy of the Bylaws, compile and keep current sets of Policies and Procedures promulgated by the Executive Council and the standing committees, and submit monthly and annual membership status reports.

Treasurer shall submit a written financial report to the Executive Council, and to submit a written report at the annual meeting of the condition of the funds of the Mazamas.

ARTICLE VI – NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

Section 1. A Nominating Committee consisting of nine members shall operate as a special
standing committee. The Nominating Committee’s duties shall be to nominate candidates for
the Board to be voted in by membership at the annual meeting, nominate the directors who are not Mazamas members, , to gather the self-nominations for Nominating Committee positions, and to administer the elections process. Three of the nine Nominating Committee members shall be elected each year by voting members at the annual election for a term of three years next ensuing such election. Any voting member in good standing may self-nominate for an open position on the Nominating Committee by delivering notice to the chair of the Nominating Committee. The Nominating Committee shall select a chairperson. The Nominating Committee has authority to fill vacancies in their committee.

Section 4. The Nominating Committee shall report the names of the nominees at the third quarter Board meeting. The office shall post the slate of nominees on the Mazamas website for two months before the election which will be held the day of the annual meeting.

Section 5. The office shall, at least 21 days prior to the annual election, send to each voting
member of the Mazamas a notice listing the names of of all Director nominees and Nominating Committee candidates. 

Section 6. The annual election of Directors to the Board shall be held at a designated meeting place on the day of the annual meeting, and the voting shall be by ballot and electronic voting. The ballot voting will be open during regular office hours but for not less than four hours on the day of election. Electronic voting will be close by 3 pm on the day of election. A plurality of votes shall elect.

Section 8. The Nominating Committee shall appoint tellers and manage the process and any
appeals that might occur.

ARTICLE VII – COMMITTEES

Section 1 Member Committees. The Board shall create committees as needed to conduct the essential work in support of the purpose of the Mazamas, as stated in Article II of these Bylaws. The Board shall define and approve the duties and responsibilities of all committees which shall be outlined and summarized in the Mazamas Policies and Procedures. to set the agenda.

Section 2. Board of Director Committees. The Executive Council may create committees of its own members as needed. There shall be two standing committees – Executive and Finance Committees. Committee chairs must be members of the Executive Council.

Section 3. Executive Committee. The four officers serve as the members of the Executive Committee. The Executive Committee shall review the performance of the Executive Director. Except for the power to amend the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws, the Executive Committee shall have all the powers and authority of the Executive Council in the intervals between meetings of the Executive Council, subject to the direction and control of the Board.

Section 4. Finance Committee. The Treasurer is chair of the Finance Committee, which includes at least two other Executive Council members. The Finance Committee is responsible for developing and reviewing fiscal procedures and annual budget with staff and other
Executive Council members. The Executive Council must approve the budget, and all expenditures must be within the budget. Any major change in the budget must be approved by the Executive Council or the Executive Committee. The fiscal year shall be from the first day of October through the thirtieth day of September. Quarterly reports are required to be submitted to the Executive Council showing income, expenditures and pending income. The financial records of the Executive Council are public information and shall be made available to the membership, Executive Council and the public.

Article VIII – DIRECTOR AND STAFF 

Executive Director. The Executive Director is hired by the Board. The Executive Director has day-to-day responsibility for the Mazamas, including carrying out the Mazamas goals and Board  policy. The Executive Director will attend all Board meetings, report on the progress of the Mazamas, answer questions of the Board Council and carry out the duties described in the job description. The Board can designate other duties as necessary.

ARTICLE IX – LIABILITY OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS; INDEMNIFICATION

Section 1.	Officer and Director Liability
No director or uncompensated officer shall be personally liable to the corporation for monetary damages for conduct as a director or officer, except for:
Any breach of the director’s or officer’s duty or loyalty to the corporation;
Acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
Any unlawful distribution;
Any transaction from which the director or officer derived an improper personal benefit; and
Any act or omission in violation of ORS Section 65.361, 65.364, or 65.367.

Section 2.	Indemnification of Directors, Officers, Employees or Agents
The corporation shall indemnify any individual made a party to a proceeding because the individual is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation against liability incurred in the proceeding if:
The conduct of the individual was in good faith;
The individual reasonably believed that the individual’s conduct was in the best interest of the corporation, or at least not opposed to its best interest; and
In the case of any criminal proceedings, the individual had no reasonable cause to believe the conduct of the individual was unlawful.

ARTICLE X – SIGNING AUTHORITY and BONDING

Corporate documents shall be executed by two officers consisting of the Executive Director, President or a Vice President in conjunction with the secretary or treasurer, or such other agent(s) as authorized by the Board. The corporate financial documents which include, with limitation, checking, savings, and evidences of indebtedness, may be executed by one authorized officer or such other agent(s) as authorized by the Board if the amount is $5,000 or less. Any checks or other negotiable instruments in excess of $5,000 must be signed by two authorized officers or such other agent(s) as authorized by the board. All officers or agents authorized to execute financial documents, checks, evidences of indebtedness, otherwise dealing with the financial affairs of the corporation, shall be bonded in the amount of not less than $5,000 with a company authorized to issue such bonding within the State of Oregon. The corporation shall pay all expenses, premiums, or charges in connection therewith.

ARTICLE XI – CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

It is essential that the work of the Mazamas not be compromised by any conflict of interest, or the appearance of conflict of interest, on the part of the board or staff. This policy is designed to help members of the board and staff avoid situations that may involve a conflict of interest between their personal or professional activities or interests and their activities as board members and staff of the Mazamas. In making decisions on grant applications and other matters involving the Mazamas, the board members and staff must strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. 

Upon the consideration of any proposed transaction in which the board member or staff member has a conflict of interest, it is the responsibility of the board member or staff member to disclose such conflict. Such transactions include, but are not limited to, grants, loans, contracts, purchases, and rental agreements. The board member or staff member shall abstain from discussing or voting on, or otherwise attempting to influence the decision on the proposed transaction with respect to which the board member or staff member has a conflict of interest, but may provide information if requested to do so. 

A board member or staff member has a conflict of interest in connection with a transaction if:
The board member or staff member is (or expects following the transaction with the Mazamas to become) a board member, employee or consultant for a nonprofit or for-profit organization that is a party to the transaction;
The board member or staff member has a material financial interest in a party to the transaction; or
The board member or staff member has an immediate family connection by blood, marriage or significant long term relationship with a person affiliated with an organization that may benefit from approval of a financial transaction with the Foundation. 

ARTICLE XII – CONFIDENTIALITY

Each director and staff member of the Foundation shall use his or her best efforts to refrain from disclosing or using confidential information of the Foundation. 
ARTICLE XIII – PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY

The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall be the parliamentary
authority in matters of procedure not specifically covered by these Bylaws.

ARTICLE XIV – FISCAL YEAR

The fiscal year of the Mazamas shall be from the first day of October through the
Thirtieth day of September.









